Alternate Solution for USACO 1018 (#3915)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/gold/usaco-1018.mdx

author: Aakash Gokhale, Sriya Mudunuri, Daniel Ge
---

<Spoiler title="Hint 1 (solution 1)">
We iterate over all the start and endpoints in sorted order. The idea is to count how much each segment contributes to the overall complexity.
</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Hint 2 (solution 1)">
To avoid overcounting, we only count it if our segment is the beginning of a connected component in any given subset.
</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Hint for solution 2">
We sort the segments by their left endpoints. We then solve the problem for the first segment, then the first two segments, then the first three segments, and so on.

You will need to use [indexed sets](https://usaco.guide/gold/PURS?lang=cpp#finding-the-k-th-element).

> </Spoiler>

Reviewer: just add hints for a single solution

To control this, **we first sort the segments by their left-ends**. This means that each new segment can only either merge itself into a previous segment (without merging previously disjoint segments) or form a new disjoint segment.

We also know that our new segment forms a new disjoint segment if and only if it merges with previous segments that doesn't intersect with it. Therefore, the transition formula is,

$c_{k+1} = c_k + 2^{\text{number of previous segments that don't intsersect } segment_k}$

To count the $\text{number of previous segments that don't intsersect } segment_k$, we use an indexed set that stores the right endpoints of previous segments. We can use its order_of_key function to determine the number of previous segments that end before our left endpoint.

## Implementation
<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>
```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

// Importing indexed sets
#include <ext/pb_ds/assoc_container.hpp>
using namespace __gnu_pbds;
template <class T>
using Tree =

>     tree<T, null_type, less<T>, rb_tree_tag, tree_order_statistics_node_update>;

Reviewer: hb you make this a codesnip (idk, you can reject this)

Author: yeah that's a good idea

const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;

// Binary exponentation

> int powermod(long long base, long long exp) {

Reviewer: did you use the guide's powermod? i'd like utility functions like this to be consistent

Author: it has been changed, I also put it in a code snippet such that everything's uniform

	base %= MOD;
	long long result = 1;
	while (exp > 0) {
		if (exp % 2 == 1)  // if n is odd
			result = result * base % MOD;
		base = base * base % MOD;
		exp /= 2;  // divide by two
	}
	return result;
}

> int N, tot = 0;

Reviewer: make n lowercase & tot local

vector<pair<int, int>> ranges;

int main() {
	ifstream fin("help.in");

> 	ofstream fout("help.out");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

	fin >> N;
	for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
		int a, b;
		fin >> a >> b;
		ranges.push_back({a, b});
	}

> 	// Sorting ranges by their left values

Reviewer: ```suggestion

	// Sorting ranges by their left values
```

	sort(ranges.begin(), ranges.end());

	Tree<pair<int, int>> pastend;
	for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
		int left = ranges[i].first, right = ranges[i].second;

		// Counting # of previous ranges that don't intersect
		int unaffiliated = pastend.order_of_key({left, -1});

		tot = (2 * tot) % MOD + powermod(2, unaffiliated);
		tot %= MOD;
		pastend.insert({right, i});
	}

> 	fout << tot << endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion

	ofstream("help.out") << tot << endl;
```

To control this, **we first sort the segments by their left-ends**. This means that each new segment can only either merge itself into a previous segment (without merging previously disjoint segments) or form a new disjoint segment.

We also know that our new segment forms a new disjoint segment if and only if it merges with previous segments that doesn't intersect with it. Therefore, the transition formula is,

$c_{k+1} = c_k + 2^{\text{number of previous segments that don't intsersect } segment_k}$

To count the $\text{number of previous segments that don't intsersect } segment_k$, we use an indexed set that stores the right endpoints of previous segments. We can use its order_of_key function to determine the number of previous segments that end before our left endpoint.

## Implementation

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

// BeginCodeSnip{Importing indexed sets}
#include <ext/pb_ds/assoc_container.hpp>
using namespace __gnu_pbds;
template <class T>
using Tree =
    tree<T, null_type, less<T>, rb_tree_tag, tree_order_statistics_node_update>;

const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;
// EndCodeSnip

> // BeginCodeSnip{Binary Exponentation}
> long long exp(long long x, long long n) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// BeginCodeSnip{Binary Exponentation (from module)}
long long exp(long long x, long long n) {
```

	assert(n >= 0);
	x %= MOD;  // note: MOD * MOD must be less than 2^63 to avoid ll overflow
	long long res = 1;
	while (n > 0) {
		if (n % 2 == 1) { res = res * x % MOD; }
		x = x * x % MOD;
		n /= 2;
	}
	return res;
}
// EndCodeSnip

int n;
vector<pair<int, int>> ranges;

> 

Reviewer: wait none of these have to be global

</PySection>
</LanguageSection>
</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Solution 2">

<Warning>

This solution makes use of [indexed sets](/gold/PURS?lang=cpp#finding-the-k-th-element).

</Warning>

## Explanation

> Let the complexity sum of the first $k$ segments be $c_k$. Use $c_k$ to calculate $c_{k+1}$ in a process similar to dynamic programming, and our final answer would be $c_N$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let the complexity sum of the first $k$ segments be $c_k$. Use $c_k$ to calculate $c_{k+1}$ in a process similar to dynamic programming, and our final answer is $c_N$.
```

From $c_k$ to $c_{k+1}$, our new set of subsets is,

$$\text{\{the previous set of subsets\} } \cup \text{ \{the previous set of subsets with }\texttt{seg}_{k+1}\text{ added to each of them\}}$$

The sum of the complexities of the previous set of subsets is still $c_k$. However, adding $\texttt{seg}_{k+1}$ to each of them may merge lots of previously disjoint segments (if $\texttt{seg}_{k+1}$ happened to intersect all of them).

> To control this, **we first sort the segments by their left endpoints**. This means that each new segment can only either merge itself into a previous segment (without merging previously disjoint segments) or form a new disjoint segment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To control this, **sort the segments by their left endpoints**. This means that each new segment can only either merge itself into a previous segment (without merging previously disjoint segments) or form a new disjoint segment.
```

</PySection>
</LanguageSection>
</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Solution 2">

<Warning>

> This solution makes use of [indexed sets](https://usaco.guide/gold/PURS?lang=cpp#finding-the-k-th-element).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This solution makes use of [indexed sets](/gold/PURS?lang=cpp#finding-the-k-th-element).
```

</Warning>

## Explanation

> We process the segments one-by-one. Let the complexity sum of the the first $k$ segments be $c_k$. We'll use $c_k$ to calcualte $c_{k+1}$ in a process similar to dynamic programming. Our answer would then be $c_N$.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We process the segments one-by-one. Let the complexity sum of the first $k$ segments be $c_k$. We'll use $c_k$ to calculate $c_{k+1}$ in a process similar to dynamic programming. Our answer would then be $c_N$.
```

> We process the segments one-by-one. Let the complexity sum of the the first $k$ segments be $c_k$. We'll use $c_k$ to calcualte $c_{k+1}$ in a process similar to dynamic programming. Our answer would then be $c_N$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let the complexity sum of the first $k$ segments be $c_k$. Use $c_k$ to calculate $c_{k+1}$ in a process similar to dynamic programming, and our final answer would be $c_N$.
```

From $c_k$ to $c_{k+1}$, our new set of subsets is,

$$\text{\{the previous set of subsets\} } \cup \text{ \{the previous set of subsets with }segment_{k+1}\text{ added to each of them\}}$$

The sum of the complexities of the previous set of subsets is still $c_k$. However, adding $segment_{k+1}$ to each of them may merge lots of previously disjoint segments (if $segment_{k+1}$ happened to intersect all of them).

To control this, **we first sort the segments by their left endpoints**. This means that each new segment can only either merge itself into a previous segment (without merging previously disjoint segments) or form a new disjoint segment.

> We also know that our new segment forms a new disjoint segment if and only if it merges with previous segments that doesn't intersect with it. Therefore, the transition formula is,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We also know that our new segment forms a new disjoint segment if and only if it merges with previous segments that don't intersect with it. Therefore, the transition formula is,
```

> The sum of the complexities of the previous set of subsets is still $c_k$. However, adding $segment_{k+1}$ to each of them may merge lots of previously disjoint segments (if $segment_{k+1}$ happened to intersect all of them).
> 
> To control this, **we first sort the segments by their left endpoints**. This means that each new segment can only either merge itself into a previous segment (without merging previously disjoint segments) or form a new disjoint segment.
> 
> We also know that our new segment forms a new disjoint segment if and only if it merges with previous segments that doesn't intersect with it. Therefore, the transition formula is,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sum of the complexities of the previous set of subsets is still $c_k$. However, adding $segment_{k+1}$ to each of them may merge lots of previously disjoint segments (for example, if $segment_{k+1}$ happened to intersect all of them), so **sort the segments by their left endpoints**. 

Each new segment can merge into a previous segment (without merging previously disjoint segments) or form a new disjoint segment, and our new segment forms a new disjoint segment if and only if it merges with previous segments that don't intersect. Therefore, the transition formula is,
```

> $c_{k+1} = c_k + 2^{\text{number of previous segments that don't intsersect } segment_k}$

Reviewer 3: eek it's kinda hard to read a \text this long, maybe you could say something like, if x is the number of prev segments ..., and then just write 2^x  or smtg

> To count the $\text{number of previous segments that don't intsersect } segment_k$, we use an indexed set that stores the right endpoints of previous segments. We can use its order_of_key function to determine the number of previous segments that end before our left endpoint.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To count the $\text{number of previous segments that don't intersect} segment_k$, we use an indexed set that stores the right endpoints of previous segments. We can use its `order_of_key` function to determine the number of previous segments that end before our left endpoint.
```

> To count the $\text{number of previous segments that don't intsersect } segment_k$, we use an indexed set that stores the right endpoints of previous segments. We can use its order_of_key function to determine the number of previous segments that end before our left endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To count the $\text{number of previous segments that don't intersect} segment_k$, use an indexed set that stores the right endpoints of previous segments. Use the `order_of_key` function to determine the number of previous segments that end before our left endpoint.
```

## Implementation

> 

Reviewer 3: time complexity?

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

// BeginCodeSnip{Importing indexed sets}
#include <ext/pb_ds/assoc_container.hpp>
using namespace __gnu_pbds;
template <class T>
using Tree =
    tree<T, null_type, less<T>, rb_tree_tag, tree_order_statistics_node_update>;

> const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;

Reviewer 3: move this out?
